Intro
------

	As Albert Einstein's General Theory of Relativity predicted more than one hundred years ago, we live in a four dimensional world--spacetime (three dimensions for space and one for time). Masses cause distortions in spacetime, which accounts for the phenomenom of gravity. And changing mass distribution will generally produce ripples in spacetime, which is Einstein's another prediction--gravitational waves*. For decades, scientists have been struggling to detect gravitational waves from the outer space. They upgraded their detectors over and over again, just in order to hear the whisper from distant celestial bodies. Fortunately, on September 14, 2015, the LIGO detectors successfully recorded the signals from two colliding black holes, which was the first direct detection of gravitational waves ever.*
	This actual detection is evidently significant. Einstein was proven right again, a new field of astronomy has been opened, new possibilities of universe study are found, increasing research on gravitational waves will be spurred, and so on. The issue will be adressed in more detail later in the paper.
	The goal of this document is to provide background information about LIGO and gravitational waves. The paper starts with some brief information about LIGO, consisting of an introduction to gravitational waves (without much math and calculation) technical details of LIGO detectors, its history (stages went through), its impact on modern science, and some of the related projects, etc.







Brief Introduction to LIGO
---------------------------------

	The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is a large-scale cutting-edge physics experiment which aimed to detect and successfully detected gravitational waves. The LIGO detectors at the LIGO Livingston Observatory (LLO), in Livingston Parish, louisiana, and the LIGO Hanford Observatory (LHO), in Hanford, Washington, are funded by the National Science Foundation*, and are operated by Caltech and MIT. There are plenty of similar projects all over the world, such as VIRGO* and eLISA*.
	From the 1990s up to the present, LIGO went through several stages, with increasing sensitivity and functions, and it had been bearing doubts. In September, 2015, just a week after the advanced LIGO was set into "observing" mode, a signal which was later confirmed to be generated by two colliding black holes was detected.* And the LIGO scientists made their official report in February, 2016.*







Intro to GW
---------------
1. The General Theory of Relativity
	In order to describe gravity, Einstein developed, on the basis of his Specific Theory of Relativity, a theory system named the General Theory of Relativity (General Relativity), which was proposed in 1915*. Despite the fact that the theory is still in contradiction with quantum theory, and that it was so complex that it took 40 or more years for most physicist to reach an agreement on it, it has successfully accounted for and predicted numerous phenomena, such as time dilation in gravitational fields, red shift of light, and gravitational waves.
	The core idea of General Relativity is that gravitation is described as a property of the geometry of spacetime which includes three dimensions for space and one for time. To be more precise, the principles state that matter curves spacetime, and objects, which maybe in a "free-fall", travel in straight paths. As a result, although objects are actually traveling in straight paths in the presence of gravity in spacetime, they are observed to be traveling in curved trajectories. The more massive an object is, the more curvature it will create in spacetime, which results in more gravitational force. And the curvature is often expressed with Riemann curvature tensor.* (insert pic)

2. Properties of Gravitational Waves
	Gravitational waves are "ripples" in the "fabric" of spacetime, caused by some strong and catastrophic happenings in the universe. More technically, they are changing gravitational fields varying with time.
	According to Einstein's calculations, gravitational waves are generated by objects acclerating with asymmetric motion. To be more precise, gravitational waves require changing quadrupole mass distribution.* The amount of gravitational waves given off is of positive correlation to its mass and its speed of motion. Changes in spacetime produced by a moving mass are not felt in the distance at once, but they propogate at the speed of light.
	Gravitational waves are tranverse waves, the same as electromagnetic waves, but they are waves of changes in tensors (quadrupole distortions of spacetime), which result in expansions and contractions in lengths in certain directions. Unlike the horizontal and vertical polarizations of electromagnetic waves, the two polarizations of gravitational waves are long the + and ¡Á direction. (insert pic). However, gravitational waves do share lots of similarities with electromagnetic waves. They have frequencies and wavelengths, whose relationship is given by $$$$. They are able to carry energy, momentum, and angular momentum away the source.* The strain amplitude can be derived from Einsteins quadrupole formula, and it can also be measured by ratio of the change in length to the original length $$$$.*

3. Sources of Gravitational  Waves
	There are various sources that can emit gravitational waves, but they fall mainly into 4 catagories: stochastic backgroud, bursts from gravitational collapse, pulsars, and binary systems. There may be some souces omitted or unexpected, but those are the strongest and most detectable ones.*
	To be added.

4. A Possible Way of Detection
	Due to the properties of gravitational waves, they cannot be measured quatitatively in a conventional way, even though they might be significant enough to be observed with bare eyes. When passing by, gravitational waves distort the space. As a result, a meter stick would also be distorted, therefore impossible to measure the change in length.
	One plausible solution would be a piezoelectric detector*, which when deformed, it generates voltage between the two disks. (insert pic) But it hadn't been sensitive enough to respond to the infinitesimally small change in length, so it finally failed. However, there's a value in the universe which always remains constant against all odds--the speed of light. Armed with this property, lights can ignore the deformation of spacetime, and show the changes in arm length with less time or less distance traveled.* Scientists have made the detector in a way such that light have to travel over 1000 km* to reach the detector, which greatly strengthened the sensitivity and increased the odds of detection.

**Some video that explains the change in space... On youtube, maybe someone had posted it on Schoology**

5. Difficulties in Detection
	










Technical Details of LIGO
--------------------------------

1. Michelson Interferometer
	The Michelson Interferometer was invented by Albert Abraham Michelson, first used in the famous Michelson-Morley experiment.* It's function is for optical interferometry. With a beamsplitter, a light source is split into the two arms, and each of the new beam are reflected back and are combined again. The result of such combination could be constructive or destructive interference, depending on the changes in length of the arms.
	The interferometer in LIGO consists of two arms are of equal length (4km long), which form an "L" shape. There is a laser light source and a photodetector at about the corner of the "L", and a beamsplitter at the corner. At each end and in the middle of the arms are four mirror which reflects the laser beam, and the two beams are combined into one at the beamsplitter. Those mirrors in the middle are used to increase the distance light beams travel, and as a result, the actual effective length is increased from 4km to 1120 km*, greatly enhancing LIGO's sensitivity. If the arm length changed, the two light beams which were originally in phase would be out of phase, creating destructive interference which allows the photodetector to sense the samll change in length of the arms.* (insert pic)

2. The LIGO Observatories
	The two LIGOs in the US are located in Livinston Parish (LLO), Louisiana and Hanford (LHO), Washington. Both are L-shaped and of the same size. (Use google earth tour at home)

3. Detector Sensitivity--Problems and Solutions
	Like any real physics experiment, the LIGO detectors face disturbance from the environment. At the very beginning of the construction, the interference of the noises are so high that it was even impossible for the detectors to collect data clean enough to analyze. Among all these sensitivity-limiting factors are majorly: seismic noise (at relatively low frequencies), thermal noise (at mid frequencies), shot noise (at high frequencies), and the problems with the lasers and electronics. 
	
	Some more specific details are given by..., especially in the fourth section.

4. Usage and Application








A Brief History of LIGO
-----------------------------











The () Impact of the Detection
-------------------------------------













Other Cognate Projects
---------------------------














Summary
------------










